2.8 Learn edits (#3159)
astronomer/docs: learn/airflow-listeners.md

---
title: "Use a listener to send a Slack notification when a dataset is updated"
sidebar_label: "Create Airflow listeners"
description: "Learn how to use Airflow listeners."
id: airflow-listeners
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import producer_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-listeners/producer_dag.py';

[Airflow listeners](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/administration-and-deployment/listeners.html#listeners) allow you to execute custom code when certain events occur anywhere in your Airflow instance, for example when a DAG run fails or any dataset is updated.

> Listeners are implemented as an [Airflow plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md) and can contain any code. In this tutorial, you'll use a listener to send a Slack notification whenever any dataset is updated.

Reviewer: I think I saw on the dev list they just voted to make listeners not experimental - do we know if that starts applying in 2.8? Just double checking we don't need a warning here.

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started) using [Astro Runtime](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/runtime-release-notes) 10+ (Airflow 2.8+).
- A Slack workspace with an [Incoming Webhook](https://api.slack.com/messaging/webhooks) configured.

## Step 1: Configure your Astro project

1. Create a new Astro project:

    ```sh
    $ mkdir astro-listener-tutorial && cd astro-listener-tutorial
    $ astro dev init
    ```

2. Add the following line to your Astro project `requirements.txt` file to install the Slack Airflow provider.

    ```text
    apache-airflow-providers-slack==8.4.0
    ```

3. Add the following environment variable to your Astro project `.env` file to create an [Airflow connection](connections.md) to Slack. Make sure to replace `<your-slack-webhook-token>` with your own Slack webhook token in the format of `T00000000/B00000000/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX`.

    ```text
    AIRFLOW_CONN_SLACK_WEBHOOK_CONN='{
        "conn_type": "slackwebhook",
        "host": "https://hooks.slack.com/services/",
        "password": "<your-slack-webhook-token>"
    }'
    ```

## Step 2: Create your listener

> To define an Airflow listener, you add the code you want to execute to a relevant `@hookimpl`-decorated  [listener function](https://github.com/apache/airflow/tree/main/airflow/listeners/spec). In this example, to run your code  whenever any dataset is updated, you define it in the `on_dataset_changed` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define an Airflow listener, you add the code you want to execute to a relevant `@hookimpl`-decorated  [listener function](https://github.com/apache/airflow/tree/main/airflow/listeners/spec). In this example, you define your function in the `on_dataset_changed` function to run whenever any dataset is updated,.
```

1. Create a new file called `listeners_code.py` in your `plugins` folder.
2. Copy the following code into the file:

```python
from airflow.datasets import Dataset
from airflow.listeners import hookimpl
from airflow.models.taskinstance import TaskInstance
from airflow.utils.state import TaskInstanceState
from airflow.providers.slack.hooks.slack_webhook import SlackWebhookHook
from sqlalchemy.orm.session import Session
from datetime import datetime

SLACK_CONN_ID = "slack_webhook_conn"

@hookimpl
def on_dataset_changed(dataset: Dataset):
    """Execute if a dataset is updated."""
    print("I am always listening for any Dataset changes and I heard that!")
    print("Posting to Slack...")
    hook = SlackWebhookHook(slack_webhook_conn_id=SLACK_CONN_ID)
    hook.send(text=f"A dataset was changed!")
    print("Done!")
    if dataset.uri == "file://include/bears":
        print("Oh! This is the bears dataset!")
        print("Bears are great :)")
        start_date = datetime.now().date()
        end_date = datetime(2024, 10, 4).date()
        days_until = (end_date - start_date).days
        print(f"Only approximately {days_until} days until fat bear week!")
```

> This listener is defined using the [`on_dataset_changed` hookspec](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/listeners/spec/dataset.py). It posts a message to Slack whenever any dataset is updated and executes additional code printing messages to the logs if the dataset that is being updated has the URI `file://include/bears`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This listener is defined using the [`on_dataset_changed` hookspec](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/listeners/spec/dataset.py). It posts a message to Slack whenever any dataset is updated and executes an additional print statement if the dataset that is being updated has the URI `file://include/bears`.
```

3. After the DAG run completed, go to the task logs of the `get_bear` task to see print statements from your listener plugin.

    ```text
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - I am always listening for any dataset changes and I heard that!
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Posting to Slack...
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {base.py:83} INFO - Using connection ID 'slack_webhook_conn' for task execution.
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Done!
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Oh! This is the bears dataset!
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Bears are great :)
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Only approximately 292 days until fat bear week
    ```

4. Open your Slack workspace to see a new message from your webhook.

    ![Screenshot of a Slack message sent by the webhook, saying "A dataset was changed!".](/img/tutorials/airflow-listeners_slack_message.png)

5. (Optional) View your complimentary bear picture at `include/bears/bear.png`.

## Conclusion

> Congratulations! You now know how to create an Airflow listener to custom code whenever a specific event occurs in your whole Airflow environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You now know how to create an Airflow listener to run custom code whenever a specific event occurs in your whole Airflow environment.
```

Maybe worth adding a sentence here about the other listeners available? Something like "you can implement a similar procedure to listen for other events such as ...."

---
title: "Use a listener to send a Slack notification when a Dataset is updated"
sidebar_label: "Create Airflow listeners"
description: "Learn how to use Airflow listeners."
id: airflow-listeners
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import producer_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-listeners/producer_dag.py';

> [Airflow listeners](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/administration-and-deployment/listeners.html#listeners) allow you to execute custom code when certain events occur anywhere in your Airflow instance, for example whenever any DAG run fails or an update to a Dataset is detected. 

Reviewer 2: This could be good contextual information to add to the guide! I understand the difference in scope a lot better now between listeners and other types of notifications

> [Airflow listeners](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/administration-and-deployment/listeners.html#listeners) allow you to execute custom code when certain events occur anywhere in your Airflow instance, for example whenever any DAG run fails or an update to a Dataset is detected. 

Author: Good idea!

Added this:

```
Listeners execute based on the event they are waiting for and are not attached to a task or DAG. This is in contrast to [Airflow callbacks](error-notifications-in-airflow.md#airflow-callbacks) which are attached to a specific DAG or (set of) task(s) or [Airflow dataset](airflow-datasets.md) consumer DAGs that only execute when a specific (set of) dataset(s) is updated.
While the listener itself will execute any time its event occurs, you can use conditional logic to determine whether or not to execute the code within the listener. For example, you can use a listener to send a Slack notification when a DAG run fails, but only if the DAG run was not manually triggered.
```

to the plugins guide :)

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started) using the [Astro Runtime image](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/runtime-release-notes) version 10.0.0 or higher (Airflow 2.8+).
- A Slack workspace with an [Incoming Webhook](https://api.slack.com/messaging/webhooks) configured.

## Step 1: Configure your Astro project

1. Create a new Astro project:

    ```sh
    $ mkdir astro-listener-tutorial && cd astro-listener-tutorial
    $ astro dev init
    ```

2. Add the following line to your `requirements.txt` file to install the Slack Airflow provider.

    ```text
    apache-airflow-providers-slack==8.4.0
    ```

3. To create an [Airflow connection](connections.md) to Slack, add the following environment variable to your `.env` file. Make sure to replace `<your-slack-webhook-token>` with your own Slack webhook token in the format of `T00000000/B00000000/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX`.

    ```text
    AIRFLOW_CONN_SLACK_WEBHOOK_CONN='{
        "conn_type": "slackwebhook",
        "host": "https://hooks.slack.com/services/",
        "password": "<your-slack-webhook-token>"
    }'
    ```

## Step 2: Create your listener

> Airflow listeners are defined using the `@hookimpl` decorator on functions defined with the same name and parameters as listed in the [listeners spec](https://github.com/apache/airflow/tree/main/airflow/listeners/spec) source code.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To define an Airflow listener, you add the code you want to execute to a relevant `@hookimpl`-decorated  [listener function](https://github.com/apache/airflow/tree/main/airflow/listeners/spec). In this example, to run your code  whenever a dataset is updated, you define it in the `on_dataset_changed` function.
```

from sqlalchemy.orm.session import Session
from datetime import datetime

SLACK_CONN_ID = "slack_webhook_conn"

@hookimpl
def on_dataset_changed(dataset: Dataset):
    """Execute if a dataset is updated."""
    print("I am always listening for any Dataset changes and I heard that!")
    print("Posting to Slack...")
    hook = SlackWebhookHook(slack_webhook_conn_id=SLACK_CONN_ID)
    hook.send(text=f"A dataset was changed!")
    print("Done!")
    if dataset.uri == "file://include/bears":
        print("Oh! This is the bears dataset!")
        print("Bears are great :)")
        start_date = datetime.now().date()
        end_date = datetime(2024, 10, 4).date()
        days_until = (end_date - start_date).days
        print(f"Only approximately {days_until} days until fat bear week!")
```

This listener is defined using the [`on_dataset_changed` hookspec](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/listeners/spec/dataset.py). It posts a message to Slack whenever a Dataset is updated and executes additional code printing messages to the logs if the dataset that is being updated has the URI `file://include/bears`.

## Step 3: Create the listener plugin

> For Airflow to recognize your listener, you need to create a plugin that registers it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Airflow to recognize your listener, you need to create a [plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md) that registers it.
```

1. Create a new file called `listener_plugin.py` in your `plugins` folder.
2. Copy the following code into the file:

> ```python

Reviewer 2: This code block needs to be indented by 4 spaces

from airflow.plugins_manager import AirflowPlugin
from plugins import listener_code

class MyListenerPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
    name = "my_listener_plugin"
    listeners = [listener_code]
```

> :::info
> 
> Remember to restart your Airflow instance after making any changes to your plugins. For more information on Airflow plugins, see [Airflow plugins](using-airflow-plugins.md).
> 
> :::
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. If your local Airflow environment is already running, restart it to apply the changes to your plugins.

```

    The task produces an update to the `file://include/bears` Dataset, which triggers the listener you created in [Step 2](#step-2-create-your-listener).

## Step 5: Run your DAG

1. Run `astro dev start` in your Astro project to start Airflow, then open the Airflow UI at `localhost:8080`.

2. In the Airflow UI, run the `producer_dag` DAG by clicking the play button.

3. After the DAG run completed, go to the task logs of the `get_bear` task to see print statements from your listener plugin.

    ```text
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - I am always listening for any Dataset changes and I heard that!
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Posting to Slack...
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {base.py:83} INFO - Using connection ID 'slack_webhook_conn' for task execution.
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Done!
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Oh! This is the bears dataset!
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Bears are great :)

>     [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Only approximately 292 days until fat bear wee

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    [2023-12-17, 14:46:51 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:188} INFO - Only approximately 292 days until fat bear week
```
Crucial fix

    ```

> 4. In your Slack workspace, you can see a new message from your webhook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Open your Slack workspace to see a new message from your webhook.
```

    ![Screenshot of a Slack message sent by the webhook, saying "A dataset was changed!".](/img/tutorials/airflow-listeners_slack_message.png)

> 5. (Optional). View your complimentary bear picture at `include/bears/bear.png`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. (Optional) View your complimentary bear picture at `include/bears/bear.png`.
```
